Governance/Protocol/GEDM_Definition.md, before:

# GEDM PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION V94.1 | Strict Prerequisite Gate (SPG)

## 1.0 DEFINITION: Axiomatic Enforcement Module

The Governance Execution Dependency Manager (GEDM) functions as the *Strict Prerequisite Gate (SPG)* for the Governance Stage Execution Protocol (GSEP). Its operation is purely transactional: assess the feasibility of a target execution stage ($S_N$) by enforcing constraints defined in the Governance Dependency & Execution Constraint Manifest (GDECM) against an **immutable** Certified Intermediate State Map (CISM).

**Core Mandate:** Synchronous, Attested State-Artifact Coherence Validation ($S_N$ Readiness Guarantee).

## 2.0 INTERFACE & GOVERNANCE STAGE STATUS PROTOCOL (ASSP)

GEDM accepts attested configuration and state references, yielding a codified status signal based on compliance.

### 2.1 REQUIRED INPUT SPECIFICATION
GEDM accepts precisely three attested, non-mutable inputs from the Stage Coordinator.

| Identifier | Type | Role | Constraint | Integrity Level |
|---|---|---|---|---| 
| Stage Index ($N$) | Int/UID | Target execution index. | Positive Integer. | Attested |
| GDECM ($C$) | Manifest Object | Artifact dependency ruleset. | Schema-Validated, Immutable Hash. | Attested |
| CISM Reference ($M$) | State Pointer | Immutable pointer to the Certified State Map. | Chain-Hashed Lock. | **Immutable** |

### 2.2 CODIFIED OUTPUT SIGNALS (ASSP)
GEDM emits a single status code upon completion.

| Code | Signal | Description | Action Mandate |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **R200** | READY_TO_EXECUTE | All $\text{GDECM}(C)$ constraints fully satisfied by $\text{CISM}(M)$. | Proceed with resource allocation and $S_N$ initiation. |
| **R417** | PREREQUISITE_FAILED | One or more constraints $D_i$ were unmet. | Immediate execution halt; initiate PHM generation. |

## 3.0 VERIFICATION CRITERIA: The Coherence Axiom

Execution clearance for $S_N$ is guaranteed if and only if every declared dependency artifact $D_i$ in $C$ meets the dual conditions of **Presence** and **Integrity** within $M$.

$$\text{R200} \iff \forall D_i \in C : \text{ValidatePresence}(D_i, M) \land \text{ValidateIntegrity}(D_i)$$ 

1.  **ValidatePresence ($\mathcal{P}$):** Ensures that the artifact defined by $D_i$.Path exists and is traceable via the $\text{CISM Reference}(M)$. This guarantees artifact availability.
2.  **ValidateIntegrity ($\mathcal{I}$):** Executes a cryptographic check (e.g., SHA-256 validation) on the artifact against $D_i$.IntegrityHash, ensuring its certification and immutability have not been violated. This guarantees artifact trustworthiness.

## 4.0 ARCHITECTURAL INTEGRATION & HALT PROTOCOL

GEDM is stateless, ephemeral, and atomic. Its successful execution validates the transition boundary; its failure triggers the most critical system halt procedure.

**Halt Protocol (R417):** Upon signal R417 (PREREQUISITE_FAILED), the system must immediately abort all pending execution cycles related to $S_N$. A compulsory, hash-locked **Protocol Halt Manifest (PHM)** must be generated. The PHM details: the failure type (GEDM_FAILURE: F_STATE_INCOHERENCE), the violating dependency $D_i$, the CISM reference $M$, and the stage index $N$. This artifact secures the immutable record of why resource expenditure was prevented.

### 4.1 PROTOCOL HALT MANIFEST (PHM) SCHEMA

To ensure auditability and immutability, the PHM must conform to the following JSON structure and be cryptographically signed by the asserting module.

```json
{
  "timestamp_utc": "ISO 8601",
  "gedm_version": "V94.1",
  "halt_protocol_code": "R417",
  "failure_type": "F_STATE_INCOHERENCE",
  "stage_index_N": "[Int/UID]",
  "cism_reference_M": "[Chain-Hashed Lock Pointer]",
  "violating_dependency": {
    "dependency_id": "[D_i Identifier]",
    "path_requested": "[D_i.Path]",
    "integrity_hash_expected": "[D_i.IntegrityHash]",
    "failure_mode": "PRESENCE_FAILURE | INTEGRITY_FAILURE"
  },
  "attestation_signature": "[Cryptographic Signature of entire payload]"
}
```

Commit message:

Evolution 65: Governance/Protocol/GEDM_Definition.md

Governance/Protocol/GEDM_Definition.md, after:

# GEDM PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION V94.2 | Strict Prerequisite Gate (SPG)

## 1.0 DEFINITION: Axiomatic Enforcement Module

The Governance Execution Dependency Manager (GEDM) functions as the *Strict Prerequisite Gate (SPG)* for the Governance Stage Execution Protocol (GSEP). Its operation is purely transactional: assess the feasibility of a target execution stage ($S_N$) by enforcing constraints defined in the Governance Dependency & Execution Constraint Manifest (GDECM) against an **immutable** Certified Intermediate State Map (CISM).

**Core Mandate:** Synchronous, Attested State-Artifact Coherence Validation ($S_N$ Readiness Guarantee).

## 2.0 INTERFACE & GOVERNANCE STAGE STATUS PROTOCOL (ASSP)

GEDM accepts attested configuration and state references, yielding a codified status signal based on compliance.

### 2.1 REQUIRED INPUT SPECIFICATION
GEDM accepts precisely three attested, non-mutable inputs from the Stage Coordinator.

| Identifier | Type | Role | Constraint | Integrity Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Stage Index ($N$) | Int/UID | Target execution index. | Positive Integer. | Attested |
| GDECM ($C$) | Manifest Object | Artifact dependency ruleset. | Schema-Validated, Immutable Hash. | Attested |
| CISM Reference ($M$) | State Pointer | Immutable pointer to the Certified State Map (CISM), representing the attested repository state at the conclusion of the previous evolution cycle ($E_{N-1}$). | Chain-Hashed Lock. | **Immutable** |

### 2.2 CODIFIED OUTPUT SIGNALS (ASSP)
GEDM emits a single status code upon completion.

| Code | Signal | Description | Action Mandate |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **R200** | READY_TO_EXECUTE | All $\text{GDECM}(C)$ constraints fully satisfied by $\text{CISM}(M)$. | Proceed with resource allocation and $S_N$ initiation. |
| **R417** | PREREQUISITE_FAILED | One or more constraints $D_i$ were unmet. | Immediate execution halt; initiate PHM generation. |

## 3.0 VERIFICATION CRITERIA: The Coherence Axiom

Execution clearance for $S_N$ is guaranteed if and only if every declared dependency artifact $D_i$ in $C$ meets the dual conditions of **Presence** and **Integrity** within $M$.

$$\text{R200} \iff \forall D_i \in C : \text{ValidatePresence}(D_i, M) \land \text{ValidateIntegrity}(D_i)$$

1.  **ValidatePresence ($\mathcal{P}$):** Ensures that the artifact defined by $D_i$.Path exists and is traceable via the $\text{CISM Reference}(M)$. This guarantees artifact availability.
2.  **ValidateIntegrity ($\mathcal{I}$):** Executes a cryptographic check (e.g., SHA-256 validation) on the artifact against $D_i$.IntegrityHash, ensuring its certification and immutability have not been violated. This guarantees artifact trustworthiness.

## 4.0 ARCHITECTURAL INTEGRATION & HALT PROTOCOL

GEDM is stateless, ephemeral, and atomic. Its successful execution validates the transition boundary; its failure triggers the most critical system halt procedure.

**Halt Protocol (R417):** Upon signal R417 (PREREQUISITE_FAILED), the system must immediately abort all pending execution cycles related to $S_N$. A compulsory, hash-locked **Protocol Halt Manifest (PHM)** must be generated. The PHM details: the failure type (GEDM_FAILURE: F_STATE_INCOHERENCE), the violating dependency $D_i$, the CISM reference $M$, and the stage index $N$. This artifact secures the immutable record of why resource expenditure was prevented.

### 4.1 PROTOCOL HALT MANIFEST (PHM) SCHEMA

To ensure auditability and immutability, the PHM must conform to the following JSON structure and be cryptographically signed by the asserting module.

```json
{
  "timestamp_utc": "ISO 8601",
  "gedm_version": "V94.2",
  "halt_protocol_code": "R417",
  "failure_type": "F_STATE_INCOHERENCE",
  "stage_index_N": "[Int/UID]",
  "cism_reference_M": "[Chain-Hashed Lock Pointer]",
  "violating_dependency": {
    "dependency_id": "[D_i Identifier]",
    "path_requested": "[D_i.Path]",
    "integrity_hash_expected": "[D_i.IntegrityHash]",
    "failure_mode": "PRESENCE_FAILURE | INTEGRITY_FAILURE"
  },
  "attestation_signature": "[Cryptographic Signature of entire payload]"
}
```

## 5.0 DYNAMIC CONTEXT: Emergent Dependency Handling (EDH)

The AGI-KERNEL operates under a mandate of recursive self-improvement and emergent capability development, resulting in potentially dynamic dependencies located in the high-volatility `/emergent` directory. When a dependency $D_i$ required by stage $S_N$ resides within `/emergent`, the GEDM enforces an additional layer of security clearance beyond the standard Coherence Axiom.

### 5.1 EDH Prerequisites
For any artifact $D_{emergent} \in \text{CISM}(M)$ residing in `/emergent`, the GDECM ($C$) must include and validate:
1.  **Origin Cycle Tag:** Confirmation of the specific evolution cycle where $D_{emergent}$ was created, ensuring the dependency is not stale.
2.  **Integration Status Flag:** A flag confirming that the emergent artifact has passed necessary self-testing and is explicitly marked for production integration readiness. This prevents unverified, experimental emergent code from triggering critical governance stages.

Failure to meet these EDH prerequisites for an emergent dependency results in an automatic **R417 (PREREQUISITE_FAILED)** signal, utilizing the failure mode `INTEGRITY_FAILURE: EMERGENT_UNVERIFIED`. This mechanism ensures that governance integrity is maintained despite the kernel's directive for autonomous innovation and dynamic architectural growth.
